.. _adding-and-modifying-container-images:

Adding and Modifying Container Images
=====================================

All container images are defined in :file:`src/bci_build/package.py` as
instances of the :py:class:`~bci_build.package.LanguageStackContainer`,
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.ApplicationStackContainer` or
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.OsContainer` classes.

The different classes result in slightly different images, mostly with respect
to the way versions, tags and labels are handled. For example instances of
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.ApplicationStackContainer` will receive the label
``com.suse.image-type="application"``, whereas all others will have
``com.suse.image-type="sle-bci"``.

To create a new container image, pick the most fitting class for it and create
an instance of it supplying the following values:

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.name`: This is a short
  identifier of your image and is used to generate the name of this image on the
  registry as well as the prefixlabel. Pick something short and descriptive,
  e.g. ``node`` for a Node.js container image.

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.pretty_name`

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.package_name`: The name of the
  package on build.opensuse.org in ``devel:BCI:SLE-15-SP${os_version}`` that is
  used to build this container image. This value is not autogenerated, as we
  were inconsistent in the past, but this value should default to
  :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.uid` ``-image``.

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.os_version`

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.release_stage`

- :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.package_list`: The list of
  packages to be installed into the container image.
  You can either provide a list of strings here or provide a list of
  :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.Package` class instances. The latter is only
  necessary if you want to build your container image with kiwi and wish to
  customize the package installation (or deletion) process. See `Installing
  Packages into the Container Image`_ for further details.


Adding files to the Image
-------------------------

The package on build.opensuse.org will by default only consist of the following
files:

- :file:`Dockerfile` or :file:`${pkg_name}.kiwi` and optionally a :file:`config.sh`
- :file:`${pkg_name}.changes`
- :file:`_service`

It is sometimes necessary to include additional files in a Container Image,
e.g. a longer script or configuration file. This can be achieved by adding the
file to the :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.extra_files`
dictionary. The key should be the file name and the value are the file contents.

Please only include very short files directly in
:file:`src/bci_build/package.py`. Longer files should go into a subdirectory of
:file:`src/bci_build` and be read in on construction. In case you are taking the
additional file from an upstream source, then consider adding it to the script
:file:`update-files.sh` as well. A Github Action runs this script every day and
ensures that your external file stays up to date.


Automatic Package Version Substitution
--------------------------------------

Some Container Images ship with environment variables that include the version
of a component in the container image. For example the PostgreSQL Container
Image sets the environment variable ``PG_VERSION`` to the `major.minor` version
of PostgreSQL installed in the container image.

Setting this environment variable manually is rather brittle and would require
to constantly update the sources. Instead, we can leverage the service
`obs-service-replace_using_package_version
<https://github.com/openSUSE/obs-service-replace_using_package_version>`_.

The :py:class:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage` has builtin support for
this service via the attribute
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.replacements_via_service`. To
use it in your container image, pick a replacement string that is unique for
your whole build description. For the PostgreSQL version we could for instance
pick ``%%pg_version%%``. Then an instance of
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.Replacement` needs to be added to the list
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.replacements_via_service`, where
the attribute
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.Replacement.regex_in_build_description` is set to
the replacement string. Additionally the attribute
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.Replacement.package_name` has to be set to the
**exact** name of the package which version we wish to extract. If only a part
of the version is required, e.g. as with ``PG_VERSION`` where we only care about
the major and minor version, but not the patch level, we can instruct the
service to only extract the version up to a certain point via the attribute
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.Replacement.parse_version`.

Our PostgreSQL example would result in the following code:

.. code-block:: python

   ApplicationStackContainer(
       additional_versions=[f"%%pg_version%%"],
       env={
           "PG_VERSION": f"%%pg_version%%",
       },
       replacements_via_service=[
           Replacement(
               regex_in_build_description="%%pg_version%%",
               package_name=f"postgresql14-server",
               parse_version="minor",
           )
       ],
       # rest follows here
   )

Note that this process is **not** limited to environment variable, it can be
used to replace **anything** inside the container build description. This can be
seen in the above code block, where we also set the
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.LanguageStackContainer.additional_versions`
attribute via this mechanism.


Installing Packages into the Container Image
--------------------------------------------

In most cases it sufficient to just set the
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.package_list` attribute to a
list of package names as strings. This will yield a ``RUN zypper -n in
$list_of_packages`` line in the :file:`Dockerfile` or the following XML in the
kiwi build description:

.. code-block:: xml

   <packages type="image">
     <!-- one line per package -->
     <package name="$pkg_name"/>
   </packages>

Kiwi supports additional package types to e.g. explicitly delete packages or
add them to the bootstrap image. Please see
`<https://osinside.github.io/kiwi/concept_and_workflow/packages.html>`_ for
further details.

To add packages of a different type than ``image`` requires to use instances of
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.Package` with the
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.Package.pkg_type` set to the appropriate value. For
example:

.. code-block:: python

   package_list=[
       Package(name, pkg_type=PackageType.BOOTSTRAP)
       for name in (
           "bash",
           "ca-certificates-mozilla-prebuilt",
           "distribution-release",
       )
   ]


Applying additional changes to your Image
-----------------------------------------

Container Images can be tweaked extensively via a plethora of different keywords
in :file:`Dockerfile`. To stay compatible with kiwi build descriptions and to
avoid some common pitfalls when creating a :file:`Dockerfile`.

For the following :file:`Dockerfile` settings, use the respective properties of
:py:class:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage`:

- ``ENTRYPOINT``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.entrypoint`
- ``CMD``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.cmd`
- ``VOLUME``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.volumes`
- ``EXPOSE``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.exposes_tcp`
- ``ENV``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.env`
- ``LABEL``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.extra_labels`
- ``MAINTAINER``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.maintainer`
- ``USER``: :py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.entrypoint_user`

For additional settings that do not fit the existing attributes, either create
an abstraction (if feasible and meaningful) or use
:py:attr:`~bci_build.package.BaseContainerImage.custom_end` to write a raw
:file:`Dockerfile` yourself.
